# Entry 1 - 14 October, 2024

This marks the first entry in my journal for what I've taken to calling "Project Titov" en lieu of an actual title as of yet. Each of my projects (past the point when I adopted the naming convention, anyway) are codenamed after the first humans in space, in order, and so this project, my fourth under this scheme, is named in honour of Gherman Titov, fourth human being in space.

As to what this project actually *is*, that's a little harder to describe. My goal here is to combine a few different fixations of mine into a single project. To wit:
-- Complex systems collapse, as typified by the Late Bronze Age Collapse
-- Engine-building/deck-building games
-- Sid Meier's Civilization - style historical narrative
-- Falling-forward, snowballing gameplay

To that end, this project is a narrative deckbuilder based on the Late Bronze Age which will, most playthroughs, end in the player's defeat and demise at the hands of multiple overlapping crises, ranging from the military (the arrival of the Sea Peoples) to climactic (increased droughts in the Eastern Mediterranean) to biological (an outbreak of the Bubonic Plague). It should be noted that while I am using real-world analogues here, the game itself is not a work of history, and while each fictional society is based with varying degrees of fidelity on real-world cultures, I am deliberately taking significant liberties in making them more like composite societies than exact representations. 

I want to unpack what I mean by "narrative deckbuilder" for a moment. In order to progress through the game, the player will be forced to deal with a deck of Milestones, comparable to the main story deck in a game like the Arkham Horror LCG from Fantasy Flight. The player will be able to deal with each of the Milestones at minimum one of two ways, each choice both branching the narrative of future Milestones as well as adding cards into the player's deck. For instance, the player's decision to adopt a nobles-on-chariots-based military will not only put the card "Noble Charioteers" in their deck, it will also lead to *other* future events, like those same nobles attempting to leverage their military strength into greater political influence. Additionally, the game will track how often certain cards are played in order to trigger *other* cards. For example, playing the "Tax Collection" card three times will add a "Peasant Unrest" Objective into the deck - harmless in itself, but potentially catastrophic if multiple are drawn at once, with unrest boiling over to open rebellion.

As a rule, I want the player to be adding more and more cards to their deck and relatively rarely taking them out. Deck-thinning is a core element of most deckbuilders, but I want to use it sparingly to represent the sheer inertia that political institutions can develop over time. Backing out of the deal that you cut with the Priests of the Moon God will not be so easy as simply removing them from your deck, alas. 

On a mechanical level, the cards in a player's deck will modify one of four resources, usually trading one off for another:
-- Might, representing military strength
-- Stability, representing political unity and bureaucratic capacity
-- Food, representing taxes in the form of grain and livestock (the primary currency of the state in this era)
-- Influence, representing prestige on the world stage and one's ranking relative to the other Great Powers.

As an aside, I'm considering adding in a "Trade Goods" resource that only comes into play later to represent how these societies became increasingly economically interdependent in the years prior to the Collapse. I'm still undecided, to be honest. Four may be enough, and if I expand to five then why not six...? I may end up making an experimental version of the game with this rule implemented and just vibe out how it feels to play. 

There is also a so-called "hidden" variable that I'm representing, if abstractly: state capacity, as represented by card draw. Generally, actions which increase the number of cards that a player draws per turn (and thus the number of options they have to resolve crises each turn) are narratively tied to increases or investments in state bureaucracy. This is also a double-edged sword, however - Misfortune cards which can lose the player the game get worse the more you draw at once. A top-heavy state bureaucracy can turn out to be as much curse as blessing.

Final note to wrap this up and summarize some of the key changes / mechanics implementations I've done in the pre-MDM Before Times:

1. Previously, all four resources ticked down by 1 every turn. Objectives were completed by "committing" resources, which would not be lost but had to be at a given threshold in order to complete the objective. This proved absolutely punishing at worst and needlessly complicated at best. Now, players simply pay resources, but don't lose them (usually) unless they choose to. This required a fair bit of rebalancing, but at least the game isn't punishingly unfair anymore. Just regular unfair.

2. So far the element that people have enjoyed most is the fact that the world is quite dynamic. Nearly every Milestone and Objective that the player must complete is attached to a timer, giving the player only a certain number of turns to complete them until some negative event occurs. This has served both a tutorializing purpose ("What am I supposed to do?" - Complete these objectives!) and also a sense that the world is in constant motion. You aren't just launching a brutal raid against the Kingdom of the Cedars because you can (you monster), you're doing it because not doing so makes you look bad in front of the court and the community of Great Powers (you craven monster). 

3. This sort of abstracted, longue-duree style historical storytelling has been really useful at telling the story of these cultures (or rather my fantasy interpretations thereof) in a compelling way, but it's also a necessarily top-down history in a way that I'm not entirely satisfied with. Common people more or less exclusively enter into the game as either obstacles or resources, never as fleshed-out people in their own right. I'd like to think of some kind of way to put a human face on the story the game is telling, but I'm honestly not really sure how to do it. Maybe this just isn't the game for that. 

4. I'm at the point in the game's story where the player will start interacting with the other Great Powers of the Mediterranean, which is going to involve quite a lot of new cards and other mechanics being brought in, as well as the game's rather breakneck opening pace slowing down a fair deal before the endgame. I'm also at the same time reading Eric Cline's two books on the Bronze Age Collapse, "1177" and "After 1177" (thereby encompassing all of human history, one presumes) and want to get to Joseph Tainter's writings on complex social collapse as well. This will help inform my designs as I continue to work on them. 

5. Pursuant to 4, I also want to use the biggest narrative branches to explore different deck archetypes / meta-strategies in the way that Slay the Spire has, eg. "Demon Form" builds or "Poison" builds. Off the top of my head, here are the general deck concepts that spring to mind. 
	-- High-value-card deck (STS: Strength build)
	-- Hand manipulation deck (STS: Discard build)
	-- Card draw combo deck (STS: Adrenaline Rush builds)
	-- One-Trick-Pony deck (using a single resource for many different scenarios)
	-- Naval Power deck (taking few provinces but getting rich off of trade after Act 2)
	-- Land Power deck (taking many provinces with a large military)
	-- Self-damage/MTG "black" decks
	-- Levy-based, "Death by a thousand cuts" decks
	-- Time/Crisis manipulation decks

I'm sure I'll increase this list over time, but keeping these archetypes in mind should help. 

Signing off for now - will update more as I continue my research/design!

# Entry 2 - 17 October, 2024

Started Act 2 today and got another round of Act 1 Playtesting in. Some quick notes to myself so I don't forget where I'm going with this today:

- Playtest summary
-- Tutorialization
-- Learning Curve
-- Adapting to Digital
- Act 2 Design
-- Trade Goods 
-- Card modification
-- Onboarding
-- Act 1 Denouement
-- Subtype expansion / keywords
-- Pharaoh will remember this

Had a playtest with Morning Star here at TAG. She says she doesn't play many games, which is good as a baseline of how complex these systems actually are. I'm too close to the whole thing at this point so I've lost perspective. 

Overall the playtest went well, she successfully completed all 4 milestones in the game so far (even if she sort of sprinted through to the end and might not have fared as well had the game continued past that point). I kept general strategic advice to a minimum, just drawing connections between cards and mechanics where appropriate. The learning curve of the game is pretty hardcore at this point, so a tutorial setup with a rigged opening hand and opening set of Objectives might be worthwhile. Maybe even dropping the Milestones altogether for the very first game. I'll try and put something together soon.

That said, the game systems are strong enough that once she got the hang of the rhythm of the game she was able to make not just tactical but strategic decisions. Her feedback was consistent with what else I've received - the game is stressful but engaging, daunting at first but coherent once you wrap your head around it. I think I'll mess with M3 (Foreign Yoke) and M2 (Ways of War) a little bit - there's basically no reason to choose the preserve the old ways if you didn't already go Hill Country Archer. Maybe that's the point - it's the ahistorical path. Will see if some bright new ideas occur. 

Other than the above, a major takeaway is that strong tooltip implementation is going to be incredibly important - especially nested tooltips. That will go a long way toward making the whole thing click a little better. Bookkeeping being done on the cards themselves will also be essential. I want to avoid the "Ahh.... right, forgot about that" response as much as possible.

In terms of Act 2 Design, my major change is twofold. First, the world will open up slightly, giving the player a fourth Objective slot and therefore cycling the various world events faster. Second, new world events are going to be added, especially as regards to trading with other empires (or raiding them). The game will also add a fifth, rather unique resource - Trade Goods. This is meant to represent the fact that the Bronze Age Mediterranean was extremely interconnected, and that it was the collapse of those trade networks which heralded the demise not just of polities like the Hittite Empire, but of entire peoples. 

To that end, the player will spend Trade Goods to either duplicate a card of a given subtype or amplify the effect of that card in perpetuity. Eg. the player will be able to spend (through a card) a trade good to make one of their Tax Collection cards gain 4 food instead of 2, at the cost of not only 1 Stability but now also 1 Trade Good. These numbers aren't quite final yet. I'm anticipating a slightly worse than 1:1 exchange rate for Trade Goods to Food, the ratio improving (at higher upfront cost) the further afield the player sources their goods. Tin for example was primarily mined in Badakhshan, in modern-day Afghanistan and traded overland across the Iranian plateau to Mesopotamia and then the Near East. 

Crucially, Trade cards will be Seasonal - use them or lose them. Conversely, they will also reproduce themselves. Every 3 times a trade route is played, it will add a copy of itself into the deck. 

Card modification is a very important part of most deckbuilders and one I want to mechanically represent, and I think this will allow me to implement in it a way that is ludonarratively compelling. Losing supplies of things like tin for bronze could be catastrophic for an army that has equipped its soldiery with state-of-the-art bronze weapons. As the player upgrades their cards to keep up with the ever-accelerating resource power curve, they will find themselves more and more dependent on trade - and more vulnerable should those arteries ever be cut by, say, a marauding band of Sea Peoples.

Act 2 (or more precisely the very end of Act 1) will also begin introducing the major forms of narrative branching. I'm using a red exclamation point as the visual symbol that a choice specifically will cause consequences down the line but not in the immediately obvious sense of "Gain this bad card into your deck." Sort of a "Pharaoh will remember this" a la Telltale - a little reminder to keep that choice in mind.

To make this all work, I've also embraced adding keywords to cards more as a way of anchoring card effects a little more concretely. Cards like Corvee and Volunteers currently use the very awkward "Troop" and "Non-Troop" phrasing. The new schema divides cards up much more explicitly into subtypes like Statecraft, Ma'at (harmony, order, cyclical time), and Industry. This will also open up an immediate design space unto itself - cards that affect a particular type or set of types, etc. Turn-based tactics games are often quite good at this - you look at something like Age of Wonders Planetfall and its units have large numbers of (intuitive!) subtypes. The existence of "Organic" units implies weapons that do more or less damage vs. Organics, and so on. My hope is that subtyping here will have a similar effect in clarifying the intended play patterns. 

Overall big day, productive day, even if no testing of any of the new systems could be undertaken. I expect a couple more work days of both designing and then printing + manufacturing cards will be in store until I can get any kind of read on how/if Trade Goods or any of these other systems are working. 

As a related note, physical prototyping is rapidly reaching a point of diminishing returns. I'll lean on some friends for some advice on how to make a basic visual scripting card game possible in Unity to hopefully speed up my dev time a little (or at least have that to run in parallel). 

# Entry 3 - 28 October, 2024

Again a bit more of an omnibus journal entry - these will get substantially more frequent once the digital prototype proper is up and running. Shahrom has volunteered to put together the digital wireframe which will allow me to iterate much more quickly. The wireframe isn't quite mechanics-complete for reasons I'll get into, but it will be a very good foundation to build on (and test much more frequently). 

In terms of major decision decisions, I have a few to report. The first major event was my first extremely harsh/negative feedback on a playtest. I brought to the game to an acquaintance I know through Netrunner and his feedback was quite harsh. The general tenor of his comments was that, in general, he felt he was not making any interesting decisions, and while his solutions I don't think reflect the core of what this game is meant to be (he complained, among other things, about a lack of replayability, which is not a major concern of mine - this is a narrative experience at its core) some of his problems are valid.

In particular, that build of the game resolved Objectives largely in a single manner - you deal with Peasant Unrest by not taxing for one turn, you resolve Conduct Census by spending an escalating amount of Stability, etc. This, I realized, is a huge missed opportunity. I have now adopted an approach in designing events that I like to call "the easy way or the right way."

Conduct Census is a good early example, since it is one of the Events a player is most likely to encounter early and often. The newest version can be resolved in one of two ways: "Be thorough" or "Be approximate." Being thorough costs a Stability for every 5 cards in the player's control (10 cards to start, so a base cost of 2). If it is chosen, the player draws two additional cards on their next turn and raises their overall cap of bankable Food by 1. "Be approximate" by contrast always costs 2, regardless of deck size. It draws the player one card on their next turn but does not raise the Food cap. Additionally, it gives the player a "Corruption" card which saps a Food and a Might in return for a Stability. A little Corruption can be worthwhile, especially for deck archetypes that don't generate much Stability otherwise. I may even give it a +1 draw ability, to further incentivize the player to let a little corruption slide. 

The point is that the Right Way - being diligent in conducting a census of your steadily-expanding empire - is strictly better, but substantially harder. When weighed against other possible Objectives, doing a half-assed job of your recordkeeping might be worthwhile (or unavoidable) as the empire scales. This is the essence of the experience, to me. In a sentence: I want to make the player make bad decisions - which they know full well are bad! - while at the same time feeling that they're doing the best they can, given the circumstances. The tradition of dead generations weighs like a nightmare on the minds of the living, after all.

This dovetails into my next major update: failure states! It is now possible for the player to lose the game. And there was much rejoicing. These endgame crises come in three tiers - T1 in the form of a simple dilemma (again with an easy-way-right-way split), T2 in the form of a tug-of-war, and T3 in the form of a big climactic "The barbarians are at the gates" endpiece. Crucially, though, reaching T3 isn't necessarily the end. All of the T3 crises give the player the option to, again, take the easy way or the right way. Sure, you *could* rally a massive army more or less out of thin air and defend the capital from the besigers - but if you've let things devolve to this point, you've clearly already made multiple mistakes. Each T3's out lets the player randomly damage their deck in some way - knocking out Statecraft cards like Tax Collection or Diplomatic Overtures, forcing the player to disband their armies or surrender provinces, or permanently reducing the maximum bankable resources they can stockpile. There will obviously come a point where a player can no longer pay even the "Easy way" cost - and at that point, they have no choice but to let the timer to "You Lose" tick down.

This decision has made my life substantially easier in a few other regards - for starters, instead of elapsed timers simply docking the player's resources, failure is now a proactive change in game state. Don't deal with the raiders from the Upper Cataracts? You don't just lose Influence (it looks bad not to defend your people, you monster) you also gain a Border Raid (the T1 Might Crisis) into the Objective deck. Drawing two of any crisis will fuse them into the higher tier - two Border Raids become an Invasion, two Invasions become a Capital Besieged, which can end the game. I have inadvertently done myself a *massive* favour with this approach, as it also lets me scale the consequences of other Objectives to convey an escalating sense of stakes. It isn't just that you have more crises to deal with as the game develops and the Sea Peoples kick off the dominoes of collapse, but those crises themselves skip the queue by adding T2 (or, gods forbid, T3) crises straight into the deck.

Another inadvertent gift to myself (aren't I so very generous) has been clarifying a "colour pie" for my resources. What I mean by that is that I had, unwittingly, made certain strong mechanical associations with the different resources - Stability is mostly used for domestic affairs and crises on the home front, Food is essential for statecraft but less useful for Objectives, Influence almost exclusively plays out in the Objectives and Milestone decks, etc. What I've done with my latest set of designs is make those associations explicit and lean into them more. Influence now comes up much more often as an Objective or Milestone resolution, as you overawe your enemies with the grandeur of your rule and the deftness of your diplomatic acumen. Accordingly, advanced Influence cards give you greater control over the Objectives themselves, delaying timers, resolving Objectives out of turn, and perhaps even scrying into the Objective Deck itself. Stability, by contrast, is now also more closely associated with Action Card draw and filtering, as your increasingly efficient state bureaucracy gives you a more consistent set of tools to address the crises of the day. 

This, in turn, has given me a much clearer sense of the deck archetypes I want to mechanically/narratively reflect in the game. The Priests of the Moon will be Food/Stability focused, even eventually gaining the ability to translate those resources into things they otherwise struggle with. They will additionally gain the ability to erect unique Temples which grant them abilities like card recursion, deck scrying, and other tools. Perhaps they will even gain an alternate win condition - that's an interesting thought. Team Pharaoh by contrast will be Might/Influence oriented - your diplomacy and armies are substantially more effective and your card draw will improve as you consolidate power into the hands of a God-King, but at the cost of being relatively fragile and prone to internal division (and increasingly reliant on your war machine for income). This gives me lots of lovely design space to play around in and I can't wait to frolic in its fields.

That last turn of phrase tells me that I've gone on far too long with this update. My last note is that, with Shahrom's advice, I've developed a new UI which makes all of the above information much, much more accessible and legible to the player. UI is very much not a strong suit of mine, but I've learned a lot in attempting to cobble this thing together.

Alright, back to the game mines. Will check in after the newest iteration is implemented and tested.

# Entry 4 November 13, 2024

Some exciting news to report - the failure states system has been fully implemented and, barring a few speedbumps, has been a huge success! I rushed a bit to get a playable version over the line before a weekend trip to a cabin with some board-game-minded friends and was able to get a version that was at least minimally playable in place. Reviews were very positive, which is a massive relief given the scope of changes that I've been making between versions. This brings me to one of my major notes, though, which is on process. 

I'm well past the point by now that paper prototyping is an economical way of testing my game and well into the phase where it becomes an active hindrance. My own inability to get the digital wireframe up and running is beginning to seriously cost me, but there's not much to be done other than to keep my nose to the grindstone until Shahrom has it ready. In the meantime, I've been able to play with a few novel mechanical innovations and ways to make paper prototyping more efficient. In particular, I've developed universal proxies - cards simply labeled A, B, C, and D, which can take the place of any card I haven't printed enough of. Once those get printed out, I'll be able to stress out less about getting extra eg. Peasant Unrest cards or duplicated core set cards. That should reduce the "cost" of printing a fair bit, especially since both printers in the lab are still out of commission. 

I don't mean to just complain, but rather to document that using cards as a metaphor is quite a different thing from using actual, physical cards that need to be designed, cut out, and sorted/reshuffled with every playtest. My playtests are clocking in pretty consistently at 2-3 hours, minimum, which is increasingly problematic given the amount of admin overhead they involve. My hope is the digital version will yield a much faster turnaround. In the meantime, I've created an Act 2 Shortcut Checklist that lets a player simulate a reasonably plausible Act 1 final position in a few quick yes/no questions and get straight to the new content if they've played the game before.

Speaking of testing process, I now have a centralized repository for all of my playtesting data in, you guessed it, a spreadsheet. My testing notes up to this point were broadly "vibes" based, and I haven't been paying especially close attention to the exact narrative choices players have been making. This way, I'll get much better visibility - are certain options being taken too consistently? Are certain choices just too obvious? Now I'll know! This will also help me scale costs for Act 2 and Act 3 Objectives, since I'll have visibility on the resource maxima that the players are reaching. 

Back on a lighter note, some takeaways from the bit of playtesting I've been able to get in with what I've formally taken to calling Version 0.2 of the game. The first playtest ended in failure, as the player was unable to deal with the truly staggering amount of Peasant Unrest they (voluntarily!) accumulated. They drew four Unrests at once, which ended up escalating immediately all the way up to the Tier 3 Might Crisis, with his capital besieged by an angry mob. Even then, he very nearly pulled off an amazing come-from-behind victory before tragically being torn limb from limb by a riotous mob. Can't win 'em all, I suppose. This playthrough revealed a really interesting emergent strategy in the game that, while not especially historical, adds a level of skill that I think suits the game quite well - manipulating the Objective Deck's shuffle and trying not to let too many Objectives resolve all at once if you suspect your deck is full of crises. The player's mistake, in this case, was clearing five Objectives at once, meaning all of the Peasant Unrests could come out, combine, and escalate into an Endgame crisis. I felt a bit like a blackjack dealer laying out the cards, which was a fun experience. 

Fun as that experience was, I want to be particularly cognizant of when a game mechanic is ludically correct but too divorced from the historical basis to justify. Does it actually make sense to have a player's actions in the world be measured to not "stir up" more trouble and let sleeping dogs lie? Maybe not. But it is interesting, and until I get a hard no on its historicity or ludonarrative dissonacnce, I'm keeping it in (assuming I could even take it out, if I wanted to). 

That playtest also proved that Specialization as a system works broadly as designed, even if it showed me that I need to be a bit more detailed than my previous "all yields doubled" reward for specializing a card. When I get into the digital prototype, I'll start thinking about how *exactly* cards specialize. Good thing to tag for the future, since it'll also have implications for how I cost the later-game crises.

Of the new systems, trade is the most problematic. It works just *fine*, but it's really fiddly and annoying, on top of being dubiously historical. Thankfully, I've moved onto a new book in my research, Archaic State Interaction - The Eastern Mediterranean in the Bronze Age, edited by William A. Parkinson and Michael L. Galaty. I haven't finished the book by any means, but already I'm getting quite a bit of useful inspiration. In particular, I think I'm going to move the Trade mechanic out of the Action Deck and into the Objective Deck. This allows a bit more variance - the Storm Followers want food but can upgrade your troops, the Four Sisters want military protection but offer improvements to your Prestige and Fleet cards, etc. The same way that I've varied the Raids, I want the Trade Delegations (better title tk tk tk) to have a bit more narrative pop than just "Send a Trade Ship Overseas." I still need to figure out how this will square with Diplomacy, though. 

My big issue in adapting what is essentially a historical 4X game into a card game is that I don't have static map objects for a player to click on and interact with when they want to start trade, diplomacy, or war with their neighbors. The Objective Deck is structured in such a way as to be made up primarily of crises, showing a world in constant motion that the player is reacting to rather than acting upon. My solution to this is the Flashpoint system. In brief, each of your neighbors will have a Flashpoint that concerns each of your other neighbors - the Storm-Followers and the Four Sisters compete over a rebellious port city, for instance. Backing either side will lead to war with the other, souring relations and preventing trade with them until the war is concluded but yielding a temporary alliance with the other and a hefty bounty of resources should you win. I'm still shy of the requisite number of Flashpoints, but I hope this will give a little life and colour to the world. 

I think that covers it for now, I feel a blinding headache coming on so I'll get into a few other theoretical observations some other time. 
